My dear Robinson, It was to your account of a West-Country legend that this tale owes its inception. For this and for your help in the details all thanks.
The idea for this story to me provided-my my friend, the Mr. Fletcher Robinson, who me has helped besides in the line plot and in the details of setting.
La idea para este relato me laproporcionó mi amigo, el señor Fletcher Robinson, que me ha ayudado además en la línea argumental y en los detalles de ambientación.

Yours most truly, A. CONAN DOYLE.
Arthur Conan Doyle
Arthur Conan Doyle

Chapter 1
CHAPTER ONE
CAPÍTULO UNO

Mr. Sherlock Holmes
THE MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES
EL SEÑOR SHERLOCK HOLMES

Mr. Sherlock Holmes, who was usually very late in the mornings, save upon those not infrequent occasions when he was up all night, was seated at the breakfast table.
The Mr. Sherlock Holmes, who of usual got up very late, except in the occasions nothing infrequent in which not he went to bed in all the night, was breakfasting.
El señor Sherlock Holmes, que de ordinario se levantaba muy tarde, excepto en las ocasiones nada infrecuentes en que no se acostaba en toda la noche, estaba desayunando.

I stood upon the hearth-rug and picked up the stick which our visitor had left behind him the night before.
I, who me found of foot next to the fireplace, me bent to pick up the cane forgotten by our visitor of the night previous.
Yo, que me hallaba de pie junto a la chimenea, me agaché para recoger el bastón olvidado por nuestro visitante de la noche anterior.

It was a fine, thick piece of wood, bulbous-headed, of the sort which is known as a "Penang lawyer."
Solid, of wood of good quality and with a bulge to manner of handle, it was of the type that is known as “lawyer of Penang.”
Sólido, de madera de buena calidad y con un abultamiento a modo de empuñadura, era del tipo que se conoce como «abogado de Penang».

Just under the head was a broad silver band nearly an inch across. "To James Mortimer, M.R.C.S., from his friends of the C.C.H.," was engraved upon it, with the date "1884."
Immediately below of the protuberance the cane carried a wide strip of silver, of more than two centimeters, in the which was engraved “To James Mortimer, M.R.C.S., of his friends of C.C.H.,” and the year, “1884.”
Inmediatamente debajo de la protuberancia el bastón llevaba una ancha tira de plata, de más de dos centímetros, en la que estaba grabado «A James Mortimer, M.R.C.S., de sus amigos de C.C.H.», y el año, « 1884».

It was just such a stick as the old-fashioned family practitioner used to carry--dignified, solid, and reassuring.
It was exactly the kind of cane that used to carry the doctors of primary care to the old fashion: dignified, solid, and that inspired confidence.
Era exactamente la clase de bastón que solían llevar los médicos de cabecera a la antigua usanza: digno, sólido y que inspiraba confianza.

"Well, Watson, what do you make of it?"
-Let's see, Watson, to what conclusions arrive-you?
-Veamos, Watson, ¿a qué conclusiones llega?

Holmes was sitting with his back to me, and I had given him no sign of my occupation. "How did you know what I was doing?
-How knows-you what am doing-I?
-¿Cómo sabe lo que estoy haciendo?

I believe you have eyes in the back of your head."
Am going to believe that has-you eyes in the nape.
Voy a creer que tiene usted ojos en el cogote.

"I have, at least, a well-polished, silver-plated coffee-pot in front of me," said he.
-What have-I, more rather, is a shiny coffee pot with bath of silver in front of me -me answered-he-.
-Lo que tengo, más bien, es una reluciente cafetera con baño de plata delante de mí -me respondió-.

"But, tell me, Watson, what do you make of our visitor's stick?
Come on, Watson, tell-me what think-you of the cane of our visitor.
Vamos, Watson, dígame qué opina del bastón de nuestro visitante.

Since we have been so unfortunate as to miss him and have no notion of his errand, this accidental souvenir becomes of importance.
Since we have had the misfortune of not coincide with him and ignore what was what wanted-he, this memory fortuitous acquires importance.
Puesto que hemos tenido la desgracia de no coincidir con él e ignoramos qué era lo que quería, este recuerdo fortuito adquiere importancia.

Let me hear you reconstruct the man by an examination of it."
Describe-me to the owner with the data that have provided-you the examination of the cane.
Descríbame al propietario con los datos que le haya proporcionado el examen del bastón.

"I think," said I, following as far as I could the methods of my companion, "that Dr. Mortimer is a successful, elderly medical man, well-esteemed since those who know him give him this mark of their appreciation."
-Seems to me -said-I, following until where was possible the methods of my companion- that the doctor Mortimer is a doctor entered in years and prestigious who enjoys of general esteem, since those who know him have given him this show of their appreciation.
-Me parece -dije, siguiendo hasta donde me era posible los métodos de mi compañero- que el doctor Mortimer es un médico entrado en años y prestigioso que disfruta de general estimación, puesto que quienes lo conocen le han dado esta muestra de su aprecio.

"Good!" said Holmes.
-Well! -said Holmes-.
-¡Bien! -dijo Holmes-.

"Excellent!"
Excellent!
¡Excelente!

"I think also that the probability is in favour of his being a country practitioner who does a great deal of his visiting on foot."
-Also seems to me very probable that is-he doctor rural and that make on foot many of his visits.
-También me parece muy probable que sea médico rural y que haga a pie muchas de sus visitas.

"Why so?"
-Why says-you that?
-¿Por qué dice eso?

"Because this stick, though originally a very handsome one has been so knocked about that I can hardly imagine a town practitioner carrying it.
-Because this cane, despite its excellent quality, is so battered that hardly imagine-I to a doctor of city carrying-it.
-Porque este bastón, pese a su excelente calidad, está tan baqueteado que difícilmente imagino a un médico de ciudad llevándolo.

The thick-iron ferrule is worn down, so it is evident that he has done a great amount of walking with it."
The thick ferrule of iron is very worn, for which is evident that its owner has walked a lot with it.
El grueso regatón de hierro está muy gastado, por lo que es evidente que su propietario ha caminado mucho con él.

"Perfectly sound!" said Holmes.
-A reasoning perfect! -said Holmes.
-¡Un razonamiento perfecto! -dijo Holmes.

"And then again, there is the 'friends of the C.C.H.'
-And besides not there is to forget of the “friends of C.C.H.”
-Y además no hay que olvidarse de los «amigos de C.C.H.».

I should guess that to be the Something Hunt, the local hunt to whose members he has possibly given some surgical assistance, and which has made him a small presentation in return."
Imagine-I that treats-itself of a association local of hunters, to whose members is possible that has attended professionally and that have offered to him in reward this small gift.
Imagino que se trata de una asociación local de cazadores, a cuyos miembros es posible que haya atendido profesionalmente y que le han ofrecido en recompensa este pequeño obsequio.

"Really, Watson, you excel yourself," said Holmes, pushing back his chair and lighting a cigarette.
-To say truth has exceeded-you yourself to yourself -said Holmes, moving the chair from the table of the breakfast and lighting a cigarette-.
-A decir verdad se ha superado usted a sí mismo -dijo Holmes, apartando la silla de la mesa del desayuno y encendiendo un cigarrillo-.

"I am bound to say that in all the accounts which you have been so good as to give of my own small achievements you have habitually underrated your own abilities.
See-I obligated to confess that, of usual, in the stories with which has had-you to well collect my modest successes, always has underestimated-you your skill personal.
Me veo obligado a confesar que, de ordinario, en los relatos con los que ha tenido usted a bien recoger mis modestos éxitos, siempre ha subestimado su habilidad personal.

It may be that you are not yourself luminous, but you are a conductor of light.
Is possible that you yourself not be luminous, but without doubt is a good conductor of the light.
Cabe que usted mismo no sea luminoso, pero sin duda es un buen conductor de la luz.

Some people without possessing genius have a remarkable power of stimulating it.
There are people that without being geniuses possess a remarkable power of stimulus.
Hay personas que sin ser genios poseen un notable poder de estímulo.

I confess, my dear fellow, that I am very much in your debt."
Have to recognize, my dear friend, that am very in debt with you.
He de reconocer, mi querido amigo, que estoy muy en deuda con usted.

He had never said as much before, and I must admit that his words gave me keen pleasure, for I had often been piqued by his indifference to my admiration and to the attempts which I had made to give publicity to his methods.
Until then Holmes not had shown never so praiseworthy, and must recognize that his words me produced a satisfaction very intense, because the indifference with that received my admiration and my attempts of give publicity to his methods me had hurt in many occasions.
Hasta entonces Holmes no se había mostrado nunca tan elogioso, y debo reconocer que sus palabras me produjeron una satisfacción muy intensa, porque la indiferencia con que recibía mi admiración y mis intentos de dar publicidad a sus métodos me había herido en muchas ocasiones.

I was proud, too, to think that I had so far mastered his system as to apply it in a way which earned his approval.
Also me proud thought that had arrived to master his system enough as to apply-it of a form able of deserve his approval.
También me enorgullecía pensar que había llegado a dominar su sistema lo bastante como para aplicarlo de una forma capaz de merecer su aprobación.

He now took the stick from my hands and examined it for a few minutes with his naked eyes.
Act followed Holmes took possession of the cane and examined-it during some minutes.
Acto seguido Holmes se apoderó del bastón y lo examinó durante unos minutos.

Then with an expression of interest he laid down his cigarette, and carrying the cane to the window, he looked over it again with a convex lens.
Then, as if something had awakened especially his interest, left the cigarette and moved with the cane next to the window, to examine-it again with a lens convex.
Luego, como si algo hubiera despertado especialmente su interés, dejó el cigarrillo y se trasladó con el bastón junto a la ventana, para examinarlo de nuevo con una lente convexa.

"Interesting, though elementary," said he as he returned to his favourite corner of the settee.
-Interesting, although elementary -said, while returned to his place preferred in the sofa-.
-Interesante, aunque elemental -dijo, mientras regresaba a su sitio preferido en el sofá-.

"There are certainly one or two indications upon the stick. It gives us the basis for several deductions."
There are without doubt one or two indications in the cane that serve of base for several deductions.
Hay sin duda una o dos indicaciones en el bastón que sirven de base para varias deducciones.

"Has anything escaped me?" I asked with some self-importance.
-Has escaped-me something? -asked with certain presumption-.
-¿Se me ha escapado algo? -pregunté con cierta presunción-.

"I trust that there is nothing of consequence which I have overlooked?"
Trust-I in not have forgotten nothing important.
Confío en no haber olvidado nada importante.

"I am afraid, my dear Watson, that most of your conclusions were erroneous.
-Fear-I a lot, my dear Watson, that almost all your conclusions are false.
-Mucho me temo, mi querido Watson, que casi todas sus conclusiones son falsas.

When I said that you stimulated me I meant, to be frank, that in noting your fallacies I was occasionally guided towards the truth.
When have said that has served-you to me of stimulus referred-I, if have to be sincere, to that your mistakes me have led in occasions to the truth.
Cuando he dicho que me ha servido usted de estímulo me refería, si he de ser sincero, a que sus equivocaciones me han llevado en ocasiones a la verdad.

Not that you are entirely wrong in this instance.
Although neither is true that has mistaken-you completely in this case.
Aunque tampoco es cierto que se haya equivocado usted por completo en este caso.

The man is certainly a country practitioner. And he walks a good deal."
Treat-itself without doubt of a doctor rural that walks a lot.
Se trata sin duda de un médico rural que camina mucho.

"Then I was right."
-Then had-I reason.
-Entonces tenía yo razón.

"To that extent."
-Until there, yes.
-Hasta ahí, sí.

"But that was all."
-But only until there.
-Pero sólo hasta ahí.

"No, no, my dear Watson, not all--by no means all.
-Only until there, my dear Watson; because that not is all, nor much less.
-Sólo hasta ahí, mi querido Watson; porque eso no es todo, ni mucho menos.

I would suggest, for example, that a presentation to a doctor is more likely to come from a hospital than from a hunt, and that when the initials 'C.C.' are placed before that hospital the words 'Charing Cross' very naturally suggest themselves."
I would consider more probable, for example, that a gift to a doctor proceeds from a hospital and not from a association of hunters, and that when the initials CC go united to the word hospital, occur to us immediately that treats-itself of Charing Cross.
Yo consideraría más probable, por ejemplo, que un regalo a un médico proceda de un hospital y no de una asociación de cazadores, y que cuando las iniciales CC van unidas a la palabra hospital, se nos ocurra enseguida que se trata de Charing Cross.

"You may be right."
-Perhaps have-you reason.
-Quizá tenga usted razón.

"The probability lies in that direction.
-The probabilities are oriented in that sense.
-Las probabilidades se orientan en ese sentido.

And if we take this as a working hypothesis we have a fresh basis from which to start our construction of this unknown visitor."
And if adopt-we this as hypothesis of work, have-we of a new point of departure from where give shape to our unknown visitor.
Y si adoptamos esto como hipótesis de trabajo, disponemos de un nuevo punto de partida desde donde dar forma a nuestro desconocido visitante.

"Well, then, supposing that 'C.C.H.' does stand for 'Charing Cross Hospital,' what further inferences may we draw?"
-Agree; suppose that “CCH” means “Hospital of Charing Cross”; what other conclusions can take-out from there?
-De acuerdo; supongamos que «CCH» significa «Hospital de Charing Cross»; ¿qué otras conclusiones se pueden sacar de ahí?

"Do none suggest themselves?
-Not occur-to-you some of immediate?
-¿No se le ocurre alguna de inmediato?

You know my methods.
You know my methods.
Usted conoce mis métodos.

Apply them!"
Apply-them!
¡Aplíquelos!

"I can only think of the obvious conclusion that the man has practised in town before going to the country."
-Only occur-to-me the conclusion evident of that our man has exercised his profession in London before of march to the field.
-Sólo se me ocurre la conclusión evidente de que nuestro hombre ha ejercido su profesión en Londres antes de marchar al campo.

"I think that we might venture a little farther than this.
-Think-I that can venture-we a little more.
-Creo que podemos aventurarnos un poco más.

Look at it in this light.
See-it from this perspective.
Véalo desde esta perspectiva.

On what occasion would it be most probable that such a presentation would be made?
In what occasion is more probable that made-a gift of those characteristics?
¿En qué ocasión es más probable que se hiciera un regalo de esas características?

When would his friends unite to give him a pledge of their good will?
When will have put-agreement his friends for give-him that proof of affection?
¿Cuándo se habrán puesto de acuerdo sus amigos para darle esa prueba de afecto?

Obviously at the moment when Dr. Mortimer withdrew from the service of the hospital in order to start in practice for himself.
Evidently in the moment in that the doctor Mortimer left of work in the hospital for open his own practice.
Evidentemente en el momento en que el doctor Mortimer dejó de trabajar en el hospital para abrir su propia consulta.

We know there has been a presentation.
Know-we that made-to him a gift.
Sabemos que se le hizo un regalo.

We believe there has been a change from a town hospital to a country practice.
Believe-we that has produced-a change and that the doctor Mortimer has passed from the hospital of the city to a practice in the field.
Creemos que se ha producido un cambio y que el doctor Mortimer ha pasado del hospital de la ciudad a una consulta en el campo.

Is it, then, stretching our inference too far to say that the presentation was on the occasion of the change?"
Think-you that are carrying too far our deductions if say-we that the gift made-itself with motive of that change?
¿Piensa que estamos llevando demasiado lejos nuestras deducciones si decimos que el regalo se hizo con motivo de ese cambio?

"It certainly seems probable."
-Seems probable, from then.
-Parece probable, desde luego.

"Now, you will observe that he could not have been on the staff of the hospital, since only a man well-established in a London practice could hold such a position, and such a one would not drift into the country.
-Observe-you, besides, that not could form part of the staff permanent of the hospital, since only is named for those positions to professionals experienced, with a good clientele in London, and a doctor of those characteristics not would leave after to a town.
-Observará usted, además, que no podía formar parte del personal permanente del hospital, ya que tan sólo se nombra para esos puestos a profesionales experimentados, con una buena clientela en Londres, y un médico de esas características no se marcharía después a un pueblo.

What was he, then?
What was, in that case?
¿Qué era, en ese caso?

If he was in the hospital and yet not on the staff he could only have been a house-surgeon or a house-physician--little more than a senior student.
If worked-he in the hospital without have joined-to the staff permanent, only could be surgeon or doctor internal: little more than student postgraduate.
Si trabajaba en el hospital sin haberse incorporado al personal permanente, sólo podía ser cirujano o médico interno: poco más que estudiante posgraduado.

And he left five years ago--the date is on the stick.
And left five years ago; the date is in the cane.
Y se marchó hace cinco años; la fecha está en el bastón.

So your grave, middle-aged family practitioner vanishes into thin air, my dear Watson, and there emerges a young fellow under thirty, amiable, unambitious, absent-minded, and the possessor of a favourite dog, which I should describe roughly as being larger than a terrier and smaller than a mastiff."
In way that his doctor of head, person serious and of middle age, disappears, my dear Watson, and appears in his place a young man that not has fulfilled still the thirties, affable, little ambitious, distracted, and owner of a dog for the that feels great affection and that describe-I approximately as bigger than a terrier but smaller than a mastiff.
De manera que su médico de cabecera, persona seria y de mediana edad, se esfuma, mi querido Watson, y aparece en su lugar un joven que no ha cumplido aún la treintena, afable, poco ambicioso, distraído, y dueño de un perro por el que siente gran afecto y que describiré aproximadamente como más grande que un terrier pero más pequeño que un mastín.

I laughed incredulously as Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his settee and blew little wavering rings of smoke up to the ceiling.
I me threw to laugh with incredulity while Sherlock Holmes leaned back in the sofa and sent towards the ceiling trembling rings of smoke.
Yo me eché a reír con incredulidad mientras Sherlock Holmes se recostaba en el sofá y enviaba hacia el techo temblorosos anillos de humo.

"As to the latter part, I have no means of checking you," said I, "but at least it is not difficult to find out a few particulars about the man's age and professional career."
-In regarding to his last affirmations, lack-I of means for rebut-them -said-, but at least not will be difficult find some data about the age and career professional of our man.
-En cuanto a sus últimas afirmaciones, carezco de medios para rebatirlas -dije-, pero al menos no nos será difícil encontrar algunos datos sobre la edad y trayectoria profesional de nuestro hombre.

From my small medical shelf I took down the Medical Directory and turned up the name. There were several Mortimers, but only one who could be our visitor. I read his record aloud.
From the modest shelf where kept the books related with the medicine took-out the directory medical and, to search for the surname, found several Mortimer, but only one that matched with our visitor, so proceeded to read in voice loud the note biographical.
Del modesto estante donde guardaba los libros relacionados con la medicina saqué el directorio médico y, al buscar por el apellido, encontré varios Mortimer, pero tan sólo uno que coincidiera con nuestro visitante, por lo que procedí a leer en voz alta la nota biográfica.

"Mortimer, James, M.R.C.S., 1882, Grimpen, Dartmoor, Devon.
“Mortimer, James, MRCS, 1882, Grimpen, Dartmoor, Devonshire.
«Mortimer, James, MRCS, 1882, Grimpen, Dartmoor, Devonshire.

House-surgeon, from 1882 to 1884, at Charing Cross Hospital.
From 1882 to 1884 surgeon internal in the hospital of Charing Cross.
De 1882 a 1884 cirujano interno en el hospital de Charing Cross.

Winner of the Jackson prize for Comparative Pathology, with essay entitled 'Is Disease a Reversion?'
In possession of the prize Jackson of pathology compared, thanks to the work titled ‘Is the disease a regression?’.
En posesión del premio Jackson de patología comparada, gracias al trabajo titulado "¿Es la enfermedad una regresión?".

Corresponding member of the Swedish Pathological Society.
Member correspondent of the Society Swedish of Pathology.
Miembro correspondiente de la Sociedad Sueca de Patología.

Author of 'Some Freaks of Atavism' (Lancet 1882). 'Do We Progress?'
Author of ‘Some phenomena of atavism’ (Lancet, 1882), ‘Are we progressing?’
Autor de "Algunos fenómenos de atavismo" (Lancet, 1882), "¿Estamos progresando?"

(Journal of Psychology, March, 1883).
(Journal of Psychology, March of 1883).
(Journal of Psychology, marzo de 1883).

Medical Officer for the parishes of Grimpen, Thorsley, and High Barrow."
Doctor of the municipalities of Grimpen, Thorsley and High Barrow.”
Médico de los municipios de Grimpen, Thorsley y High Barrow».

"No mention of that local hunt, Watson," said Holmes with a mischievous smile, "but a country doctor, as you very astutely observed.
-Not is mentioned no association of hunters -commented Holmes with a smile malicious-; but yes that our visitor is doctor rural, as you deduced accurately.
-No se menciona ninguna asociación de cazadores -comentó Holmes con una sonrisa maliciosa-; pero sí que nuestro visitante es médico rural, como usted dedujo atinadamente.

I think that I am fairly justified in my inferences.
Think-I that my deductions are justified.
Creo que mis deducciones están justificadas.

As to the adjectives, I said, if I remember right, amiable, unambitious, and absent-minded.
In regarding to the adjectives, said-I, if not remember badly, affable, little ambitious and distracted.
Por lo que se refiere a los adjetivos, dije, si no recuerdo mal, afable, poco ambicioso y distraído.

It is my experience that it is only an amiable man in this world who receives testimonials, only an unambitious one who abandons a London career for the country, and only an absent-minded one who leaves his stick and not his visiting-card after waiting an hour in your room."
According to my experience, only a man affable receives gifts of his colleagues, only a man without ambitions leaves a career in London for go-se to a town and only a person distracted leaves the cane instead of the card of visit after of wait a hour.
Según mi experiencia, sólo un hombre afable recibe regalos de sus colegas, sólo un hombre sin ambiciones abandona una carrera en Londres para irse a un pueblo y sólo una persona distraída deja el bastón en lugar de la tarjeta de visita después de esperar una hora.

"And the dog?"
-And the dog?
-¿Y el perro?

"Has been in the habit of carrying this stick behind his master.
-Is accustomed to carry the cane to his owner.
-Está acostumbrado a llevarle el bastón a su amo.

Being a heavy stick the dog has held it tightly by the middle, and the marks of his teeth are very plainly visible.
As is a object heavy, has that hold-it with strength by the center, and the marks of his teeth are perfectly visible.
Como es un objeto pesado, tiene que sujetarlo con fuerza por el centro, y las señales de sus dientes son perfectamente visibles.

The dog's jaw, as shown in the space between these marks, is too broad in my opinion for a terrier and not broad enough for a mastiff.
The jaw of the animal, as puts of manifest the distance between the marks, is, in my opinion, too wide for a terrier and not enough for a mastiff.
La mandíbula del animal, como pone de manifiesto la distancia entre las marcas, es, en mi opinión, demasiado ancha para un terrier y no lo bastante para un mastín.

It may have been--yes, by Jove, it is a curly-haired spaniel."
Could be..., yes, clear that yes: treats-itself of a spaniel of hair curly.
Podría ser..., sí, claro que sí: se trata de un spaniel de pelo rizado.

He had risen and paced the room as he spoke.
Holmes had got up and walked by the room while spoke.
Holmes se había puesto en pie y paseaba por la habitación mientras hablaba.

Now he halted in the recess of the window.
Finally stopped next to the hollow of the window.
Finalmente se detuvo junto al hueco de la ventana.

There was such a ring of conviction in his voice that I glanced up in surprise.
There was a tone such of conviction in his voice that lifted the sight surprised.
Había un tono tal de convicción en su voz que levanté la vista sorprendido.

"My dear fellow, how can you possibly be so sure of that?"
-How can be-you so sure of that?
-¿Cómo puede estar tan seguro de eso?

"For the very simple reason that I see the dog himself on our very door-step, and there is the ring of its owner.
-By the simple reason of that am seeing the dog in front of our house, and just have heard how his owner has called to the door.
-Por la sencilla razón de que estoy viendo al perro delante de nuestra casa, y acabamos de oír cómo su dueño ha llamado a la puerta.

Don't move, I beg you, Watson.
Not move-you, beg-you.
No se mueva, se lo ruego.

He is a professional brother of yours, and your presence may be of assistance to me.
Treat-itself of one of his brothers of profession, and the presence of you can be-me of help.
Se trata de uno de sus hermanos de profesión, y la presencia de usted puede serme de ayuda.

Now is the dramatic moment of fate, Watson, when you hear a step upon the stair which is walking into your life, and you know not whether for good or ill.
This is the moment dramatic of the destiny, Watson: hear-themselves in the stairs the steps of someone that is preparing-to enter in our life and not know-we if will be for good or for bad.
Éste es el momento dramático del destino, Watson: se oyen en la escalera los pasos de alguien que se dispone a entrar en nuestra vida y no sabemos si será para bien o para mal.

What does Dr. James Mortimer, the man of science, ask of Sherlock Holmes, the specialist in crime?
What is what the doctor James Mortimer, the scientist, desires of Sherlock Holmes, the detective?
¿Qué es lo que el doctor James Mortimer, el científico, desea de Sherlock Holmes, el detective?

Come in!"
Forward!
¡Adelante!

The appearance of our visitor was a surprise to me, since I had expected a typical country practitioner. He was a very tall, thin man, with a long nose like a beak, which jutted out between two keen, gray eyes, set closely together and sparkling brightly from behind a pair of gold-rimmed glasses.
The appearance of our visitor was a surprise for me, given that expected-I to the typical doctor rural and found-I to a man very tall and thin, of nose long and hooked, shot towards forward between some eyes grey and piercing, very together, that sparkled from behind of some lenses of frame golden.
El aspecto de nuestro visitante fue una sorpresa para mí, dado que esperaba al típico médico rural y me encontré a un hombre muy alto y delgado, de nariz larga y ganchuda, disparada hacia adelante entre unos ojos grises y penetrantes, muy juntos, que centelleaban desde detrás de unos lentes de montura dorada.

He was clad in a professional but rather slovenly fashion, for his frock-coat was dingy and his trousers frayed.
Dressed according with his profession, but of way somewhat neglected, because his frock coat was dirty and the trousers, frayed.
Vestía de acuerdo con su profesión, pero de manera un tanto descuidada, porque su levita estaba sucia y los pantalones, raídos.

Though young, his long back was already bowed, and he walked with a forward thrust of his head and a general air of peering benevolence.
Hunched although still young, walked throwing the head towards forward and offered an air general of benevolence short of sight.
Cargado de espaldas, aunque todavía joven, caminaba echando la cabeza hacia adelante y ofrecía un aire general de benevolencia corta de vista.

As he entered his eyes fell upon the stick in Holmes's hand, and he ran towards it with an exclamation of joy.
Upon entering, his eyes stumbled with the cane that Holmes had between the hands, for which threw-he towards it launching a exclamation of joy.
Al entrar, sus ojos tropezaron con el bastón que Holmes tenía entre las manos, por lo que se precipitó hacia él lanzando una exclamación de alegría.

"I am so very glad," said he.
-How glad am! -said-.
-¡Cuánto me alegro! -dijo-.

"I was not sure whether I had left it here or in the Shipping Office.
Not knew if had left-it here or in the agency maritime.
No sabía si lo había dejado aquí o en la agencia marítima.

I would not lose that stick for the world."
Would feel a lot lose that cane.
Sentiría mucho perder ese bastón.

"A presentation, I see," said Holmes.
-A gift, by what see-I -said Holmes.
-Un regalo, por lo que veo -dijo Holmes.

"Yes, sir."
-So is.
-Así es.

"From Charing Cross Hospital?"
-From the hospital of Charing Cross?
-¿Del hospital de Charing Cross?

"From one or two friends there on the occasion of my marriage."
-From one or two friends that had there, with occasion of my marriage.
-De uno o dos amigos que tenía allí, con ocasión de mi matrimonio.

"Dear, dear, that's bad!" said Holmes, shaking his head.
-My, my! What a setback! -said Holmes, shaking the head.
-¡Vaya, vaya! -¿Cuál es la contrariedad?

Dr. Mortimer blinked through his glasses in mild astonishment. "Why was it bad?"
-What is the setback?
-¿Cuál es la contrariedad?

"Only that you have disarranged our little deductions.
-Only that has thrown-you by earth our modest deductions.
-Tan sólo que ha echado usted por tierra nuestras modestas deducciones.

Your marriage, you say?"
Your marriage, has said-you?
¿Su matrimonio, ha dicho?

"Yes, sir.
-Yes, sir.
-Sí, señor.

I married, and so left the hospital, and with it all hopes of a consulting practice.
Upon marrying left-I the hospital, and with that all hope of open a practice.
Al casarme dejé el hospital, y con ello toda esperanza de abrir una consulta.

It was necessary to make a home of my own."
Needed-I a home.
Necesitaba un hogar.

"Come, come, we are not so far wrong, after all," said Holmes.
-Well, well; not were-we so mistaken, after all -said Holmes-.
-Bien, bien; no estábamos tan equivocados, después de todo -dijo Holmes-.

"And now, Dr. James Mortimer ------"
And now, doctor James Mortimer...
Y ahora, doctor James Mortimer...

"Mister, sir, Mister--a humble M.R.C.S."
-Not am doctor; only a modest MRCS.
-No soy doctor; tan sólo un modesto MRCS.

"And a man of precise mind, evidently."
-And person lover of the accuracy, by what see-I.
-Y persona amante de la exactitud, por lo que se ve.

"A dabbler in science, Mr. Holmes, a picker up of shells on the shores of the great unknown ocean.
-A simple amateur to the science, sir Holmes, collector of shells in the beaches of the great ocean of the unknown.
-Un simple aficionado a la ciencia, señor Holmes, coleccionista de conchas en las playas del gran océano de lo desconocido.

I presume that it is Mr. Sherlock Holmes whom I am addressing and not ------"
Imagine that am speaking with the Mr. Sherlock Holmes and not...
Imagino que estoy hablando con el señor Sherlock Holmes y no...

"No, this is my friend Dr. Watson."
-Not is mistaken; I am Sherlock Holmes and this is my friend, the doctor Watson.
-No se equivoca; yo soy Sherlock Holmes y éste es mi amigo, el doctor Watson.

"Glad to meet you, sir.
-Delighted of meet him, doctor Watson.
-Encantado de conocerlo, doctor Watson.

I have heard your name mentioned in connection with that of your friend.
Have heard mention his name along with the of his friend.
He oído mencionar su nombre junto con el de su amigo.

You interest me very much, Mr. Holmes.
Interests-me you a lot, sir Holmes.
Me interesa usted mucho, señor Holmes.

I had hardly expected so dolichocephalic a skull or such well-marked supra-orbital development.
Not expected meet-me with a skull so dolichocephalic nor with a arch supraorbital so pronounced.
No esperaba encontrarme con un cráneo tan dolicocéfalo ni con un arco supraorbital tan pronunciado.

Would you have any objection to my running my finger along your parietal fissure?
Would mind-you that traced-I with the finger your fissure parietal?
¿Le importaría que recorriera con el dedo su fisura parietal?

A cast of your skull, sir, until the original is available, would be an ornament to any anthropological museum.
A mold of your skull, sir mine, until can dispose of the original, would be the pride of any museum anthropological.
Un molde de su cráneo, señor mío, hasta que pueda disponerse del original, sería el orgullo de cualquier museo antropológico.

It is not my intention to be fulsome, but I confess that I covet your skull."
Not is my intention seem obsequious, but confess that covet your skull.
No es mi intención parecer obsequioso, pero confieso que codicio su cráneo.

Sherlock Holmes waved our strange visitor into a chair. "You are an enthusiast in your line of thought, I perceive, sir, as I am in mine," said he.
Sherlock Holmes made a gesture with the hand to invite to our strange visitor to that took seat. -See that excites-you so much with your ideas as I with mine -said-.
Sherlock Holmes hizo un gesto con la mano para invitar a nuestro extraño visitante a que tomara asiento. -Veo que se entusiasma usted tanto con sus ideas como yo con las mías -dijo-.

"I observe from your forefinger that you make your own cigarettes.
And observe-I by your finger index that makes-you yourself the cigarettes.
Y observo por su dedo índice que se hace usted mismo los cigarrillos.

Have no hesitation in lighting one."
Not doubt in light one if so desire.
No dude en encender uno si así lo desea.

The man drew out paper and tobacco and twirled the one up in the other with surprising dexterity.
The doctor Mortimer took-out paper and tobacco and rolled a cigarette with surprising dexterity.
El doctor Mortimer sacó papel y tabaco y lió un pitillo con sorprendente destreza.

He had long, quivering fingers as agile and restless as the antennae of an insect.
His fingers, long and trembling, were so agile and restless as the antennae of a insect.
Sus dedos, largos y temblorosos, eran tan ágiles e inquietos como las antenas de un insecto.

Holmes was silent, but his little darting glances showed me the interest which he took in our curious companion.
Holmes kept silent, but the intensity of his attention me demonstrated the interest that awakened in him our curious visitor.
Holmes guardó silencio, pero la intensidad de su atención me demostraba el interés que despertaba en él nuestro curioso visitante.

"I presume, sir," said he at last, "that it was not merely for the purpose of examining my skull that you have done me the honour to call here last night and again to-day?"
-Suppose-I -said finally-, that not owe-we the honor of your visit of last night and this of today exclusively to your desire of examine my skull.
-Supongo -dijo finalmente-, que no debemos el honor de su visita de anoche y ésta de hoy exclusivamente a su deseo de examinar mi cráneo.

"No, sir, no; though I am happy to have had the opportunity of doing that as well. I came to you, Mr. Holmes, because I recognized that I am myself an unpractical man and because I am suddenly confronted with a most serious and extraordinary problem.
-No, clear is; although also me glad of have had the opportunity of do it, have come to you, sir Holmes, because not is hidden to me that am a person little practical and because me face suddenly with a problem so serious as singular.
-No, claro está; aunque también me alegro de haber tenido la oportunidad de hacerlo, he acudido a usted, señor Holmes, porque no se me oculta que soy una persona poco práctica y porque me enfrento de repente con un problema tan grave como singular.

Recognizing, as I do, that you are the second highest expert in Europe ------"
And recognizing, as I recognize, that is-you the second expert European better qualified...
Y reconociendo, como yo lo reconozco, que es usted el segundo experto europeo mejor cualificado...

"Indeed, sir!
-Ah.
-Ah.

May I inquire who has the honour to be the first?" asked Holmes with some asperity.
Can ask-to you to who corresponds the honor of be the first? -interrupted Holmes with some asperity.
¿Puedo preguntarle a quién corresponde el honor de ser el primero? -le interrumpió Holmes con alguna aspereza.

"To the man of precisely scientific mind the work of Monsieur Bertillon must always appeal strongly."
-For a person lover of the accuracy and of the science, the work of monsieur Bertillon will have always a powerful attraction.
-Para una persona amante de la exactitud y de la ciencia, el trabajo de monsieur Bertillon tendrá siempre un poderoso atractivo.

"Then had you not better consult him?"
-Not would be better consult him to him in that case?
-¿No sería mejor consultarle a él en ese caso?

"I said, sir, to the precisely scientific mind.
-Have spoken of people lovers of the accuracy and of the science.
-He hablado de personas amantes de la exactitud y de la ciencia.

But as a practical man of affairs it is acknowledged that you stand alone.
But in regarding to sense practical all the world recognizes that lacks-you of rival.
Pero en cuanto a sentido práctico todo el mundo reconoce que carece usted de rival.

I trust, sir, that I have not inadvertently ------"
Hope, sir mine, not have...
Espero, señor mío, no haber...

"Just a little," said Holmes.
-Only a little -said Holmes-.
-Tan sólo un poco -dijo Holmes-.
